There once lived a king who had three sons. They were called Pedro, Diego, and Juan. One day the king ordered the three young gentlemen to set out and seek their fortunes. The brothers each took a different direction, but before they separated, they agreed to meet later at a certain place in the forest.

After walking for many days, Don Juan met an old man on the road. The old man gave Don Juan some bread and told him to walk to a palace that was about a mile away. “When you enter the gate,” he said, “you must divide the bread I have given you among the monkeys guarding the gate to the palace. Otherwise you won’t be able to pass through the gate.”

Don Juan took the bread. When he reached the palace, he did exactly as the old man had said. When he walked through the gate, he saw a big monkey. Frightened by the sight of the animal, Don Juan was about to run away when the animal called out to him and said, “Don Juan, I know that you came here to make your fortune. Right now my daughter Chonguita is willing to marry you.” The archbishop of the monkeys was summoned, and Don Juan and Chonguita were married without delay.

A few days later Don Juan asked his wife for permission to go to the place where he and his brothers had agreed to meet. When Chonguita’s mother heard that Don Juan was going away, she said, “If you are going away, take Chonguita with you.” Don Juan was ashamed to take Chonguita because she was a monkey, but he was forced to take her, and the two set off on the road. When Don Juan met his two brothers and their beautiful wives at the appointed place, he could not get out a word. Don Diego noticed that his brother looked gloomy and asked, “What is the matter with you? Where is your wife, Don Juan?”

Don Juan sadly replied, “Here she is.”

“Where?” asked Don Pedro.

“Right behind me,” replied Don Juan.

When Don Pedro and Don Diego saw the monkey, they were startled. “Oh!” exclaimed Don Pedro, “What happened to you? Have you lost your mind?”

Don Juan was at a loss for words. Finally he managed to say, “Let’s all go back home! Our father must be waiting for us!” With that, Don Juan turned around and began walking home. Don Pedro and Don Diego, together with their wives, followed Don Juan. Chonguita walked by her husband’s side.

The king learned that his three sons had returned, and he rushed down the stairs to meet them. When he discovered that one of his sons had married a monkey, he fainted. But once he recovered his senses, he thought to himself: “This may be a stroke of bad luck, but it is God’s will. I must take the news calmly and be patient.” The king gave each of the couples a house to live in.

The more the king thought about it, the more disgraceful his son’s marriage seemed. One day, he called his three sons together and said to them, “Tell your wives that I want each one of them to make a coat for me and to embroider it. The one who fails to finish the task in three days will be put to death.” The king had issued this order with the hope that Chonguita would be put to death. He was sure she would not be able to make a coat for him. But his hopes were dashed. On the third day, the three daughters-in-law presented him with the coats they had made. The one embroidered by Chonguita was the prettiest of the three.

The king was still anxious to get rid of the monkey-wife. He ordered his daughters-in-law to embroider a cap for him in the next two days, under penalty of death if they failed. The caps were all finished right on time.

Finally he was at a loss for ideas, but he came up with the following plan. He summoned his three daughters-in-law and said, “Each of you will draw pictures on the walls of my chamber. Whoever draws the prettiest within the next three days—her husband will succeed me on the throne.” At the end of the three days the pictures were finished. When the king went to inspect them, he found that Chonguita’s was by far the prettiest, and so Don Juan was crowned king.

A feast was held in the palace to celebrate the new king. In the midst of the festivities, Don Juan became furious with his wife for insisting that he dance with her, and he hurled her against the wall. The hall suddenly turned dark after this brutal act took place. But then it grew bright again, and there was Chonguita, transformed into a beautiful woman.