There was once a sorcerer who would disguise himself as a poor man, then go begging from door to door in order to capture pretty girls. No one knew what he did with them, for they were never seen again.

One day he appeared at the door of a man who had three beautiful daughters. He looked like a poor, weak beggar and had a basket on his back, as if to collect alms. He asked for something to eat, and when the eldest girl went to the door and was about to hand him a piece of bread, he just touched her and she jumped into his basket. Then he made long legs and rushed off to get her to his house, which was in the middle of a dark forest.

Everything in the house was splendid. He gave the girl everything she wanted, and said: “My darling, I’m sure you’ll be happy here with me, for you’ll have everything your heart desires.” After a few days went by, he said: “I have to take a journey and must leave you alone for a short while. Here are the keys for the house. You can go anywhere you want and look around at everything, but don’t go into the room that this little key opens. I forbid it under penalty of death.”

He also gave her an egg and said: “Carry it with you wherever you go, because if it gets lost, something terrible will happen.” She took the keys and the egg and promised to do exactly what he had said. After he left, she went over the house from top to bottom, taking a good look at everything. The rooms glittered with silver and gold, and it seemed to her that she had never before seen such magnificence. Finally she came to the forbidden door and planned to walk right by it, but curiosity got the better of her. She examined the key, and it was just like the others. When she put it in the lock and just turned it a little bit, the door sprang open.

But what did she see when she entered! In the middle of the room was a large, bloody basin filled with dead people who had been chopped to pieces. Next to the basin was a block of wood with a gleaming ax on it. She was so horrified that she dropped the egg she was holding into the basin. She took it right out and wiped off the blood, but to no avail, for the stain immediately returned. She wiped it and scraped at it, but it just wouldn’t come off.

Not much later the man returned from his journey, and the first things he demanded were the keys and the egg. She gave them to him, but she was trembling, and when he saw the red stains, he knew she had been in the bloody chamber. “You entered the chamber against my wishes,” he said. “Now you will go back in against yours. Your life is over.”

He threw her down, dragged her in by the hair, chopped her head off on the block, and hacked her into pieces so that her blood flowed all over the floor. Then he tossed her into the basin with the others.

“Now I’ll go and get the second one,” said the sorcerer, and he went back to the house dressed as a poor man begging for alms. When the second daughter brought him a piece of bread, he caught her as he had the first just by touching her. He carried her off, and she fared no better than her sister. Her curiosity got the better of her: she opened the door to the bloody chamber, looked inside it, and when he returned she had to pay with her life.

The man went to fetch the third daughter, but she was clever and cunning. After handing over the keys and egg, he went away, and she put the egg in a safe place. She explored the house and entered the forbidden chamber. And what did she see! There in the basin were her two sisters, cruelly murdered and chopped to pieces. But she set to work gathering all their body parts and put them in their proper places: heads, torsos, arms, legs. When everything was in place, the pieces began to move and joined themselves together. The two girls opened their eyes and came back to life. Overjoyed, they kissed and hugged each other.

On his return, the man asked at once for the keys and egg. When he could not find a trace of blood on the egg, he declared: “You have passed the test, and you shall be my bride.” He no longer had any power over her and had to do her bidding. “Very well,” she replied. “But first you must take a basketful of gold to my father and mother, and you must carry it on your own back. In the meantime, I’ll make the wedding arrangements.”

She ran to her sisters, whom she had hidden in a little room and said: “Now is the time when I can save you. That brute will be the one who carries you home. But as soon as you get home, send help for me.”

She put both girls into a basket and covered them with gold until they could not be seen. Then she summoned the sorcerer and said: “Pick up the basket and go. But don’t you dare stop to rest along the way. I’ll be looking out of my little window, keeping an eye on you.”

The sorcerer lifted the basket onto his shoulders and set off with it. But it weighed so much that sweat began to pour down his face. He sat down to rest for a moment, but right away one of the girls cried out from the basket: “I’m looking out my little window, and I see that you’re resting. Get a move on.” He thought his bride was calling to him, and he went on his way. A second time he wanted to sit down, but again the voice called out: “I’m looking out my little window and I see that you’re resting. Get a move on.” Whenever he stopped, the voice called out and he had to move along until finally, gasping for breath and groaning, he carried the basket with the gold and the two girls in it into their parent’s house.

Back at home the bride was preparing the wedding celebration to which she had invited all the sorcerer’s friends. She took a skull with grinning teeth, crowned it with jewels and a garland of flowers, carried it upstairs and set it down at an attic window, facing out. When everything was ready, she crawled into a barrel of honey, cut open a featherbed and rolled in the feathers until she looked like a strange bird that not a soul would recognize. She left the house and on her way met some wedding guests, who asked:

“Oh, Fitcher’s feathered bird, where are you from?”

“From feathered Fitze Fitcher’s house I’ve come.”

“And the young bride there, what has she done?”

“She’s swept the house all the way through,

And from the attic window, she’s looking right at you.”

She met the bridegroom, who was walking back home very slowly. He too asked:

“Oh, Fitcher’s feathered bird, where are you from?”

“From feathered Fitze Fitcher’s house I’ve come.”

“And my young bride there, what has she done?”

“She’s swept the house all the way through,

And from the attic window, she’s looking right at you.”

The bridegroom looked up and saw the decorated skull. He thought it was his bride, nodded, and waved to her. But when he got to the house with his guests, the brothers and relatives who had been sent to rescue the bride were already there. They locked the doors to the house so that no one could escape. Then they set fire to it so that the sorcerer and his crew burned to death.