At the edge of a great forest, there once lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and two children. The little boy was called Hansel, and the girl’s name was Gretel. There was never much to eat in the house, and once, during a time of famine, the woodcutter could no longer put bread on the table. At night, he would lie in bed worrying, tossing and turning in his distress. One day he said to his wife with a sigh: “What will become of us? How can we provide for our poor children when we don’t even have enough for ourselves?”

“Listen to me,” his wife replied. “Tomorrow at daybreak we’ll take the children out into the darkest part of the woods. We’ll make a fire there and give them each a piece of bread. Then we’ll go about our work and leave them alone. They’ll never find their way home, and then we’ll be rid of them.”

“No,” her husband replied. “I can’t do it. I don’t have the heart to leave the children all alone in the woods and let wild beasts come and tear them to pieces.”

“You fool,” she said. “Then all four of us will end up starving to death. You might as well start sawing the boards for our coffins.”

She didn’t give her husband a moment’s peace until he agreed to the plan. “But still, I feel sorry for the poor children,” he said.

The two children hadn’t been able to sleep either, because they were so hungry, and they heard every word their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept bitter tears and said to Hansel: “Well, now we’re lost.”

“Be quiet, Gretel,” said Hansel, “and stop worrying. I’ll figure out something.”

As soon as the old folks had fallen asleep, he climbed out of bed, put on his little jacket, opened the lower half of the door, and slipped out. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles in front of the house glittered like silver coins. Hansel stooped down and put as many as would fit into his jacket pocket. Then he went back and said to Gretel: “Don’t worry, dear little sister. Sleep peacefully. God will not forsake us.” And he went back to bed.

At daybreak, just before sunrise, the wife came and woke the two children. “Get up, you lazybones, we’re going to go into the forest to fetch some wood.”

The wife gave each child a crust of bread and said: “Here’s something for lunch. But don’t eat it before then, because you’re not getting anything else.”

Gretel put the bread under her apron because Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together on the path into the forest. After a little while, Hansel stopped to look back at the house. He kept looking back. His father said: “Hansel, why are you always stopping and staring? Watch out, and don’t forget what your legs are for.”

“Oh, Father,” said Hansel. “I’m looking at my white kitten, which is sitting up on the roof saying good-bye to me.”

The woman said: “You fool, that’s not your kitten. Those are the rays of the sun, shining on the chimney.”

But Hansel had not been looking at the kitten. He had been taking the shiny pebbles from his pocket and dropping them on the ground.

When they arrived in the middle of the forest, the father said: “Go gather some wood, children. I’ll build a fire so that you won’t get cold.”

Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood until they had a little pile of it. The brushwood was lit, and when the flames were high enough, the woman said: “Now lie down by the fire, children, and get some rest. We’re going into the forest to chop some wood. When we’re done, we’ll return and take you back home.”

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire. At noon they ate their crusts of bread. Since they could hear the sounds of an ax, they were sure that their father was nearby. But it wasn’t an ax that they heard, it was a branch their father had fastened to a dead tree, and the wind was banging it back and forth. They sat and waited for so long that finally their eyes closed from exhaustion, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke, it was pitch dark. Gretel began to cry and said: “How will we ever get out of the woods!”

Hansel comforted her: “Just wait until the moon appears. Then we will find our way back.”

When the full moon appeared, Hansel took his sister by the hand and followed the pebbles, which were shimmering like newly minted coins. They marked the way back home. The two walked all night long and arrived at their father’s house at daybreak. They knocked at the door, and when the woman opened the door and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: “You wicked children! Why did you sleep so long in the woods? We were sure you were never going to come back.”

But the father was overjoyed, because he was upset at how he had abandoned the children in the woods.

Not long after that, every square inch of the country was stricken by famine. One night the children heard what the mother was saying to their father while they were in bed: “We’ve eaten everything up again. All that’s left is half a loaf of bread, and then we are done for. The children have to go. This time we’ll take them deeper into the forest so that they won’t be able find their way back home. Otherwise there’s no hope for us.”

The husband’s heart was heavy, and he thought: “It would be better if you shared the last crumb of bread with your children.” But the woman refused to pay attention to anything he said. She fussed and fumed. In for a penny, in for a pound, and since he had given in the first time, he had to give in a second time.

The children were still awake and overheard the entire conversation. While their parents were sleeping, Hansel got up and wanted to go out to pick up some pebbles as he had the last time, but the woman had locked the door, and Hansel couldn’t get out. He comforted his sister and said: “Don’t cry, Gretel. Just sleep peacefully. The Lord will protect us.”

Early the next morning the woman came and woke the children up. They each got a crust of bread, this time even smaller than last time. On the way into the woods, Hansel crushed the bread in his pocket and stopped from time to time to scatter crumbs on the ground.

“Hansel, why do you keep stopping and staring?” the father asked. “Keep going!”

“I’m looking at my little dove, the one sitting on the roof and trying to bid me farewell,” Hansel replied.

“Fool,” said the woman. “That isn’t your little dove. Those are the rays of the morning sun shining up on the chimney.”

After a while, Hansel had scattered all the crumbs on the path.

The woman took the children even deeper into the woods, where they had never been before in their lives. Once again a large fire was built, and the mother said: “Don’t move from there, children. If you feel tired, you can sleep for a while. We’re going to go into the forest to chop some wood. In the evening, when we’re done, we’ll come to get you.”

At noon Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who had scattered bits of his piece on the path. Then they fell asleep. The evening went by, but no one came to get the poor children. They awoke when it was pitch dark, and Hansel comforted his sister by saying: “Just wait, Gretel, until the moon appears. Than we will be able to see the crumbs of bread I scattered. They will mark the way home for us.”

When the moon appeared, they set off, but they couldn’t find the crumbs because the many thousands of birds flying through the forest and over the fields had eaten them. Hansel said to Gretel: “We’ll find our way back,” but they didn’t find it. They walked all night long and then another day from early in the morning until late at night. But they still couldn’t find their way out of the woods, and they grew hungrier and hungrier, for they had nothing to eat but the few berries they found on the ground. After a while, they were so tired that their legs could no longer carry them, and they lay down under a tree and fell asleep.

It was now the third morning after they had left their father’s house. They started walking again, but they just ended up moving deeper and deeper into the woods. If help did not come their way soon, they were sure to perish. At noon they saw a beautiful bird, white as snow, perched on a branch. It sang so beautifully that they stopped to listen. When the bird had finished its song, it flapped its wings and flew on ahead of them. They followed it until they came to a little house, and the bird perched on its roof. As they approached the house, they realized it was built of bread and had a roof made of cake as well as transparent windows made of sugar.

“Let’s see what it tastes like,” said Hansel. “May the Lord bless our meal. I’ll try a piece of the roof, Gretel, and you can try the window. That’s sure to taste sweet.” Hansel reached up and broke off a small piece of the roof to see what it tasted like. Gretel went over to the windowpane and nibbled on it. Suddenly a gentle voice called from inside:

“Nibble, nibble, little mouse?

Who’s that nibbling at my house?”

The children replied:

“The wind so mild,

The heavenly child.”

and they continued eating, without getting distracted. Hansel, who liked the taste of the roof, tore off a big chunk, and Gretel knocked out an entire windowpane and sat down on the ground to taste it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman, old as the hills, hobbled out, leaning on a crutch. Hansel and Gretel were so terrified that they dropped everything they were holding. The old woman said, with her head shaking: “Well, dear children, how in the world did you get here? Come right inside and stay with me. No harm will come to you here.”

She took them by the hand and led them into her little house. They were served a wonderful meal of milk and pancakes with sugar, apples, and nuts. Later, two beautiful little beds were made up for them with white sheets. Hansel and Gretel lay down in them and felt as if they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so friendly. She was really a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children. She had built the little house of bread just to lure them inside. As soon as a child was in her power, she killed it, cooked it, and ate it. That was a real feast day for her. Witches have red eyes and can’t see very far, but they have a keen sense of smell, like animals, and they can always tell when a human being is around. When Hansel and Gretel got near her, she laughed fiendishly and sneered: “They’re mine! This time they won’t get away from me!” Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she climbed out of bed and looked at the two of them resting so sweetly, with their big red cheeks. She muttered to herself: “They will make a tasty morsel.”

Then she grabbed Hansel with her scrawny hand, took him to a small shed, and locked the door, which had bars on it. He could shout as loud as he wanted, it did him no good. Then she went over to Gretel, shook her until she woke up, and cried out: “Get up, lazybones, fetch some water and cook your brother something good. He’s staying outside in a shed, waiting to be fattened up. When he’s put on enough weight, I’ll eat him.”

Gretel began to cry bitter tears, but it did no good. She had to do what the wicked witch demanded. The finest food was cooked for poor Hansel, and Gretel got nothing but crab shells. Every morning the old woman would slink over to the little shed and shout: “Hansel, hold out your finger so that I can tell if you’re plump enough.”

Hansel would stick a little bone out, and the old woman, who had poor eyesight, thought that it was Hansel’s finger and wondered why he wasn’t putting on weight. When four weeks had passed and Hansel was still as scrawny as ever, she lost her patience and decided not to wait any longer. “Hey there, Gretel,” she called out to the girl, “go get some water and be quick about it. I don’t care whether Hansel’s plump or scrawny. He’s going to be slaughtered tomorrow, and then I’ll cook him.”

“Oh,” the poor little sister wailed, and how the tears flowed down her cheeks! “Dear God, help us,” she cried out. “If only the wild animals in the forest had eaten us, at least then we would have died together.”

“Spare me your tears!” the old woman said. “Nothing can help you now.”

Early in the morning Gretel had to go fill the kettle with water and light the fire. “First we’ll do some baking,” the old woman said. “I’ve already heated up the oven and kneaded the dough.”

She pushed poor Gretel over to the oven, from which flames were leaping. “Crawl in,” said the witch, “and see if it’s hot enough to slide the bread in.”

The witch was planning to shut the door as soon as Gretel climbed into the oven. Then she was going to bake her and eat her up too. But Gretel saw what was on her mind and said: “I don’t know how to get in there. How do I do it?”

“Silly goose,” said the old woman. “The opening is big enough. Just look. Even I can get in,” and she scrambled over to the oven and stuck her head in it. Gretel gave her a big push that sent her sprawling. Then she shut the iron door and bolted it. Phew! the witch began screeching dreadfully. But Gretel ran away and the godless witch burned miserably to death.

Gretel ran straight to Hansel, opened the little shed and cried out: “Hansel, we’re free! The old witch is dead.”

Hansel hopped out as soon as the door opened, like a bird leaving its cage. How thrilled they were: they hugged and kissed, and jumped up and down for joy! Since there was nothing more to fear, they went straight back to the witch’s house. In every corner there were chests filled with pearls and jewels. “These are even better than pebbles,” said Hansel, and he put as much as he could into his pockets.

Gretel said, “I’ll take something home too,” and she filled up her little apron.

“Let’s get going now,” said Hansel. “We have to make our way out of this witch’s forest.”

After walking for a few hours, they reached a large body of water. “We can’t get across,” said Hansel. “There’s not a bridge in sight.”

“There aren’t any ships around,” Gretel said, “but here comes a white duck. It will help us cross, if I ask it.” She called out:

“Help us, help us, little duck

Hansel and Gretel are out of luck.

There’s no bridge, not far or wide,

Help us, give us both a ride.”

The duck came paddling over. Hansel got on it and told his sister to sit down next to him. “No,” said Gretel, “that would be too heavy a load for the little duck. It can take us over one at a time.”

That’s just what the good little creature did. When they were safely on the other side and had marched on for some time, the woods became more and more familiar. Finally they could see their father’s house from afar. They began running, and then they raced into their father’s house, throwing their arms around him. The man had not had a happy hour since the day that he had abandoned the children in the forest. His wife had died. Gretel emptied her apron, and the pearls and jewels rolled all over the floor. Hansel reached into his pockets and pulled out one handful of jewels after another. Their worries were over, and they lived together in perfect happiness.

My fairy tale is done. See the mouse run. Whoever catches it can make a great big fur hat out of it.ß