There was a man named Mr. Bluebeard. He got his wife in his house, an’ he general catch people an’ lock up into a room, an’ he never let him wife see that room.

One day he went out to a dinner an’ forgot his key on the door. An’ his wife open the door an’ find many dead people in the room. Those that were not dead said: “Thanky, Missis; Thanky Missis.”

An’ as soon as the live ones get away, an’ she was to lock the door, the key drop in blood. She take it up an’ wash it an’ put it in the lock. It drop back into the blood.

An’ Mr. Bluebeard was an old-witch an’ know what was going on at home. An’ as he sat at dinner, he called out to get his horse ready at once. An’ they said to him: “Do, Mr. Bluebeard, have something to eat before you go.”

“No! Get my horse ready.”

So they bring it to him. Now he doesn’t ride a four-footed beast, he ride a t’ree-foot horse.1

An’ he get on his horse an’ start off itty-itty-hap,2 itty-itty-hap, until he get home.

Now Mrs. Bluebeard two brother was a hunter-man in the wood. One of them was old-witch, an’ he said: “Brother, brother, something home wrong with me sister.”

“Get ’way you little foolish fellah,” said the biggest one.

But the other say again: “Brother, brother, something wrong at home. Just get me a white cup and a white saucer, and fill it with water, and put it in the sun, an’ you will soon see what to do with the water.”

Directly the water turn blood.

An’ the eldest said: “Brother, it is truth, make we go.”

An’ Mrs. Bluebeard was afraid, because he knew Mr. Bluebeard was coming fe kill him.3 An’ he was calling continually to the cook, Miss Anne: “Sister Anne, Sister Anne, Ah! You see anyone coming? Sister Anne, Sister Anne, Ah! You see anyone coming?”

An’ Sister Anne answer: “Oh no, I see no one is coming but the dust that makes the grass so green.”

An’ as she sing done they hear Mr. Bluebeard coming, itty-itty-hap, itty-itty-hap.

Him jump straight off a him t’ree-foot beast an’ go in a the house, and catch Mrs. Bluebeard by one of him plait-hair an’ hold him by it, an’ said: “This is the last day of you.”

An’ Mrs. Bluebeard said: “Do, Mr. Bluebeard, allow me to say my last prayer.”

But Mr. Bluebeard still hold him by the hair while he sing: “Sister Anne, Sister Anne, Ah! You see anyone coming? Sister Anne, Sister Anne, Ah! You see anyone coming?”

Sister Anne answer this time: “Oh—yes! I see someone is coming, and the dust that makes the grass so green.”

Then Mr. Bluebeard took his sword was to cut off him neck, an’ his two brother appear, an’ the eldest one going to shot after Mr. Bluebeard, an’ he was afraid an’ begin to run away. But the young one wasn’t going to let him go so, an’ him shot PUM and kill him ’tiff dead.

Jack Mantora me no choose none.4