Once upon a time in the middle of winter, when snow flakes were falling from the sky like feathers, a queen was sitting and sewing by a window with a black ebony frame. While she was sewing and looking out at the snow, she pricked her finger with a needle, and three drops of blood fell onto the snow. The red looked so beautiful against the white snow that she thought to herself: “If only I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of the window frame.” Soon thereafter she gave birth to a little girl, who was as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as ebony, and she was called Snow White. The queen died after the child was born.

A year later the king married another woman. She was a beautiful lady, but proud and arrogant and could not bear being second to anyone in beauty. She had a magic mirror, and when she stood in front of it and looked at herself, she would say:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest one of all?”

The mirror would reply:

“You, oh queen, are the fairest of all.”

Then she was satisfied, for she knew that the mirror always spoke the truth.

Snow White was growing up and becoming more and more beautiful. When she was seven years old, she was as beautiful as the bright day and more beautiful than the queen herself. One day the queen asked the mirror:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest one of all?”

The mirror replied:

“My queen, you are the fairest one here,

But Snow White is a thousand times more fair than you!”

When the Queen heard these words, she trembled and turned green with envy. From that moment on, she hated Snow White, and whenever she set eyes on her, her heart turned as cold as a stone. Envy and pride grew like weeds in her heart. Day and night, she never had a moment’s peace. One day, she summoned a huntsman and said: “Take the child out into the forest. I don’t want to have to lay eyes on her ever again. You must kill her and bring me her lungs and liver as proof of your deed.” The huntsman obeyed and took her out into the woods, but just as he was pulling out his hunting knife and about to take aim at her innocent heart, she began weeping and pleading with him. “Alas, dear huntsman, spare my life. I promise to run into the woods and never return.”

Snow White was so beautiful that the huntsman took pity on her and said: “Just run away, you poor child.”

“The wild animals will devour you before long,” he thought to himself. He felt as if a great weight had been lifted from his heart, for at least he did not have to kill her. Just then a young boar ran past him, and the huntsman stabbed it to death. He took out the lungs and liver and brought them to the queen as proof that he had murdered the child. The cook was told to boil them in brine, and the wicked woman ate them up, thinking that she had eaten Snow White’s lungs and liver.

The poor child was left all alone in the vast forest. She was so frightened that she just stared at all the leaves on the trees and had no idea what to do next. She started running and raced over sharp stones and through thornbushes. Wild beasts darted near her at times, but they did her no harm. She ran as far as her legs could carry her. When night fell, she saw a little cottage and went inside to rest. Everything in the house was tiny, and indescribably dainty and spotless. There was a little table, with seven little plates on a white cloth. Each little plate had a little spoon, seven little knives and forks, and seven little cups. Against the wall were seven little beds in a row, each made up with sheets as white as snow. Snow White was so hungry and thirsty that she ate a few vegetables and some bread from each little plate and drank a drop of wine out of each little cup. She didn’t want to take everything away from one place. Later, she was so tired that she tried out the beds, but they did not seem to be the right size. The first was too long, the second too short, but the seventh one was just right, and she stayed in it. Then she said her prayers and fell fast asleep.

After it was completely dark outside, the owners of the cottage returned. They were seven dwarfs who spent their days in the mountains mining ore and digging for minerals. They lighted their seven little lanterns, and when the cottage brightened up, they saw that someone had been there, for some things were not the way they had left them.

The first one asked: “Who’s been sitting on my little chair?”

The second asked: “Who’s been eating from my little plate?”

The third asked: “Who’s been eating my little loaf of bread?”

The fourth asked: “Who’s been eating from my little plate of vegetables?”

The fifth asked: “Who’s been using my little fork?”

The sixth asked: “Who’s been cutting with my little knife?”

The seventh asked: “Who’s been drinking from my little cup?”

The first one turned around and saw some wrinkles on his sheets and said: “Who climbed into my little bed?”

The others came running and each shouted: “Someone’s been sleeping in my bed too.”

When the seventh dwarf looked in his little bed, he saw Snow White lying there, fast asleep. He shouted to the others who came running and who were so astonished that they raised their seven little lanterns to let the light shine on Snow White.

“My goodness, oh my goodness!” they exclaimed. “What a beautiful child!”

They were so delighted to see her that they decided not to wake her up and let her continue sleeping in her little bed. The seventh dwarf slept for one hour with each of his companions until the night was over.

In the morning, Snow White woke up. When she saw the dwarfs, she was frightened, but they were friendly and asked, “What’s your name?”

“My name is Snow White,” she replied.

“How did you get to our house?” asked the dwarfs.

Then she told them how her stepmother had tried to kill her and that the huntsman had spared her life. She had run all day long until she had arrived at their cottage.

The dwarfs told her: “If you will keep house for us, cook, make the beds, wash, sew, knit, and keep everything neat and tidy, then you can stay with us, and we’ll give you everything you need.”

“Yes, with pleasure,” Snow White replied, and she stayed with them.

She kept house for them. In the morning, they went up to the mountains in search of minerals and gold. In the evening, they returned, and dinner had to be ready for them. Since the girl was by herself during the day, the good dwarfs gave her a strong warning:

“Beware of your stepmother. She’ll know soon enough that you’re here. Don’t let anyone in the house.”

After the queen had finished eating what she thought were Snow White’s lungs and liver, she was sure that she was once again the fairest of all in the land. She went to the mirror and said:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest of them all?”

The mirror replied:

“Here you’re the fairest, dearest queen,

But little Snow White, who plans to stay

With the seven dwarfs far far away,

Is now the fairest ever seen.”

When the queen heard this she was horrified, for she knew that the mirror could not tell a lie. She realized that the huntsman had deceived her and that Snow White must still be alive. She thought long and hard about how she could kill Snow White. Unless she herself was the fairest in the land, she would never be able to feel anything but envy. Finally, she came up with a plan. After staining her face and dressing up as an old peddler woman, she was completely unrecognizable. She traveled beyond the seven hills to the seven dwarfs in that disguise. Then she knocked on the door and called out: “Pretty wares for a good price.”

Snow White peeked out of the window and said: “Good day, old woman, what do you have for sale?”

“Nice things, pretty things,” she replied. “Staylaces1 in all kinds of colors,” and she took out a silk lace woven of many colors.

“I can let this good woman in,” Snow White thought to herself, and she unbolted the door and bought the pretty lace.

“Oh my child, what a sight you are. Come, let me lace you up properly.”

Snow White wasn’t the least bit suspicious. She stood in front of the old woman and let her put on the new lace. The old woman laced her up so quickly and so tightly that Snow White’s breath was cut off, and she fell down as if dead.

“So much for being the fairest of them all,” she said and hurried away.

Not much later, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home. When they saw their beloved Snow White lying on the ground, they were horrified. She didn’t move in the slightest, and they were sure she was dead. They lifted her up, and when they saw that she had been laced too tightly, they cut the staylace in two. Snow White began to breathe, and little by little she came back to life. When the dwarfs heard what had happened, they said: “The old peddler woman was none other than the wicked queen. Beware, and don’t let anyone in unless we’re at home.”

When the wicked woman returned home, she went to the mirror and asked:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest of them all?”

The mirror replied as usual:

“Here you’re the fairest, dearest queen,

But little Snow White, who plans to stay

With the seven dwarfs far far away,

Is now the fairest ever seen.”

The blood froze in her veins when she heard those words. She was horrified, for she knew that Snow White was still alive. “But this time,” she said, “I will dream up something that will destroy you.”

Using all the witchcraft in her power, she made a poisoned comb. She then changed her clothes and disguised herself as another old woman. Once again she traveled beyond the seven hills to the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door, and called out: “Pretty wares at a good price.”

Snow White peeked out of the window and said: “Go away, I can’t let anyone in.”

“But you can at least take a look,” said the old woman, and she took out the poisoned comb and held it up in the air. The child liked it so much that she was completely fooled and opened the door. When they had agreed on a price, the old woman said: “Now I’ll give your hair a good combing.”

Poor Snow White suspected nothing and let the woman go ahead, but no sooner had the comb touched her hair when the poison took effect, and the girl fell senseless to the ground.

“There, my beauty,” said the wicked woman, “now you’re finished,” and she rushed away.

Fortunately, it was almost evening, and the seven dwarfs were on their way home. When they saw Snow White lying on the ground as though dead, they suspected the stepmother right away. They examined Snow White and found the poisoned comb. As soon as they pulled it out, Snow White came back to life and told them what had happened. Again they warned her to be on her guard and not to open the door to anyone.

At home, the queen stood before the mirror and said:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest of them all?”

The mirror answered as before:

“Here you’re the fairest, dearest queen,

But little Snow White, who plans to stay

With the seven dwarfs far far away,

Is now the fairest ever seen.”

When the queen heard the words of the mirror, she began trembling with rage. “Snow White must die!” she cried out. “Even if it costs me my life.”

Then she went into a remote, hidden chamber where no one ever set foot and made an apple full of poison. On the outside it looked beautiful—white with red cheeks—so that if you saw it you longed for it. But anyone who took the tiniest bite would die. When the apple was finished, she stained her face, dressed up as a peasant woman, and traveled beyond the seven hills to the seven dwarfs.

She knocked at the door, and Snow White put her head out the window to say: “I can’t let anyone in. The seven dwarfs won’t allow it.”

“That’s all right,” replied the peasant woman. “I’ll get rid of my apples soon enough. Here, I’ll give you one.”

“No,” said Snow White, “I’m not supposed to take anything.”

“Are you afraid that it’s poisoned?” asked the old woman. “Here, I’ll cut the apple in two. You eat the red part, I’ll eat the white.”

The apple had been made so artfully that only the red part of it was poison. Snow White felt a craving for the beautiful apple, and when she saw that the peasant woman was eating it, she could no longer resist. She put her hand out the window and took the poisoned half. But no sooner had she taken a bite when she fell down on the ground dead. The queen stared at her with savage eyes and burst out laughing: “White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony! This time the dwarfs won’t be able to bring you back to life!”

At home, she asked the mirror:

“Mirror, mirror, on the wall,

Who’s the fairest of them all?”

And finally it replied:

“Oh queen, you are the fairest in the land.”

Her envious heart was finally at peace, as much as an envious heart can be.

When the little dwarfs returned home in the evening, they found Snow White lying on the ground. Not a breath of air was coming from her lips. She was dead. They lifted her up and looked around for something that might be poisonous. They unlaced her, combed her hair, washed her with water and wine, but it was all in vain. The dear child was dead and nothing could bring her back. They placed her on a bier, and all seven of them sat down on it and mourned her. They wept for three days. They were about to bury her, but she still looked just like a living person with beautiful red cheeks.

They said: “We can’t possibly lower her into the dark ground.” And so they had a transparent glass coffin made that allowed Snow White to be seen from all sides. They put her in it, wrote her name on it in golden letters, and added that she was the daughter of a king. They brought the coffin up to the top of a mountain, and one of them was always there to keep vigil. Animals also came to mourn Snow White, first an owl, then a raven, and finally a dove.

Snow White lay in the coffin for a long, long time. But she did not decay and looked as if she were sleeping, for she was still white as snow, red as blood, and with hair as black as ebony.

One day the son of a king was traveling through the woods and arrived at the dwarfs’ cottage. He wanted to spend the night there. On top of the mountain, he saw the coffin with beautiful Snow White lying in it, and he read what had been written in golden letters. Then he said to the dwarfs: “Let me have the coffin. I will give you whatever you want for it.”

The dwarfs answered: “We wouldn’t sell it for all the gold in the world.”

Then he said: “Make me a present of it, for I can’t live without seeing Snow White. I will honor and cherish her as if she were my beloved.”

The good dwarfs took pity on him when they heard these words, and they gave him the coffin. The prince ordered his servants to carry the coffin away on their shoulders. It happened that they stumbled over a shrub, and the jolt freed the poisonous piece of apple lodged in Snow White’s throat. She came to life. “Good heavens, where am I?” she cried out.

The prince was overjoyed and said: “You are with me,” and he described what had happened and said: “I love you more than anything else on earth. Come with me to my father’s castle. You shall be my bride.” Snow White had tender feelings for him, and she departed with him. Their marriage was celebrated with great splendor.

Snow White’s wicked stepmother was also invited to the wedding feast. She put on beautiful clothes, stepped up to the mirror, and said:

“Mirror, mirror on the wall:

Who’s the fairest of them all?”

The mirror replied:

“My queen, you may be the fairest here,

But the young queen is a thousand times more fair.”

The wicked women let loose a curse, and she became so petrified with fear that she didn’t know what to do. At first she didn’t want to go to the wedding feast. But she never had a moment’s peace after that and had to go see the young queen. When she entered, Snow White recognized her right away. The queen was so terrified that she just stood there and couldn’t budge an inch. Iron slippers had already been heated up over a fire of coals. They were brought in with tongs and set right in front of her. She had to put on the red hot iron shoes and dance in them until she dropped to the ground dead.