Once a poor man and woman had three sons. The first son told his parents he wanted to go and find a life for himself, the second said the same, and the youngest also said he wanted to go find himself a life. The father and mother didn’t want them to go, but finally they gave them permission and a blessing, and the sons set out.

The oldest went ahead of the others and he came to a resting place by a cottonwood tree, and a frog was singing there. He liked the song and shouted from below, “Why don’t you come down here so that I can marry you?”

“No, no, I can’t come down,” the frog replied. “You couldn’t make a life with me.”

Finally, after the boy had tried for a long time to get her to come down, the frog jumped and fell into the boy’s cape. When the boy saw her, he said, “What do I want with a frog?” And he threw her away and went on.

Later the second brother arrived there, and when he heard the frog singing so beautifully he said, “Come down so that I can marry you.”

“No, sir,” the frog said. “Yesterday a boy came by here and made me come down from my chamber, and when I came down he scorned me and threw me away.”

The boy said he wouldn’t do that. He said he really would marry her, and he spread out his cape for her to jump down. So the frog jumped down, but when he saw it he said, “Uy, how disgusting! What do I want with a frog?” And he threw her away just as his brother had done.

So then finally the youngest brother came along and like the others he heard the enchanted frog singing in the cottonwood tree. The boy told her to come down from the cottonwood because he wanted to meet her.

“No, I can’t do that,” the frog told him. “Two boys have come by here and both have asked me to come down, and then they scorned me and threw me away.” But the boy kept begging for her to come down until the frog said, “All right, spread out your cape for me to jump down.” The boy spread out the cape and the frog hopped and fell in the cape, and the boy took her and put her in his pocket. Then he went on down the road.

He came to the town where his two brothers were living. They were married now and were very proud, and the youngest brother was married too—to the frog. When they were all reunited, they wrote to their parents to tell them they were married and to send them presents. And wives of the older brothers also wrote; but not the frog. The frog couldn’t write. And the parents wrote back saying they wanted to receive gifts from the wives. They told them to send them three embroidered kerchiefs.

The youngest brother was heartsick, and when he got home to his frog he told her what his parents had written. “Don’t worry,” the frog told him. “Throw me into the sea.” So he went to the sea and threw her in, and the frog came out with a little cape made of a single cloth embroidered with pure gold.

“Send this little cape to your parents,” she told him. The sons all sent their gifts and the parents were amazed by the gift from the youngest son’s wife—a little cape made of a single cloth embroidered with pure gold.

But then the parents sent word to say that they wanted to meet their sons’ wives, told the sons to bring their wives for a visit. The sons all agreed to go to visit them with their wives, but the youngest was very worried and said to himself, “What am I going to do now? The frog doesn’t even look like a woman.” But when he went home and told the frog about it, she told him not to worry, that she would go too.

And since the frog knew that the wives of her brothers-in-law were spiteful, she went and started washing her hair with lye. The envious wives saw her and decided they were going to wash their hair with lye too. They washed their hair with lye and it all fell out and they were bald.

And then that night the frog told her husband, “Now take me and throw me into the deepest part of the sea. Leave me there and come for me in the morning.”

The boy did that, but he was very sad because he didn’t think he would see his frog ever again. The next day he got up very early and went to look for her at the place where he had thrown her into the sea, and there on the bank of the sea he found a princess in an elegant carriage.

“Here I am,” she told him, “I’m free from my enchantment. Now let’s go visit your parents.” And they started out because the other brothers and their wives were already on their way.

They all arrived, and the parents were pleased to see their sons and their wives. The wives of the older two had their heads covered so no one could see they were bald. The parents were so pleased that they gave a banquet that night.

And when they were eating, the princess pretended she was stuffing garbanzos and eggs down the front of her dress, but she was really putting in money. But the bald-headed wives really did stuff garbanzos and eggs into their dresses.

After the banquet they all went to dance, and everyone’s eye was on the beautiful princess and everyone said she was the prettiest woman they had ever seen. And with each turn she took as she was dancing she scattered pesos and silver coins. But the envious wives scattered the garbanzos and eggs they had stuffed into their bosoms when they were eating.

The people ran to get the money, and the dogs ran to get the garbanzos and eggs!