Once upon a time there was a man had one daughter. Every man come to marry her, she said, “No.” So a man came, all over was gold. And she married him. He had a horse name Sixty-Miles, for every time he jump it was sixty miles. So they went. The more he goes, his gold was dropping. Mary Bell wanted to know why his gold was dropping. He said, “That is all right.” They reached home soon. He gave her a big bunch of keys and take her around to all the room in the house. “You can open all the room except one room; for if you open it, I will kill you.” She start to wonder why her husband didn’t want her to open it. So one day she open it. It was great surprise. She saw heads of woman hanging up. She also saw a cast of blood. Her key dropped in the blood, and she couldn’t get it off. So she began to mourn. The Devil daughter told her not to cry. She took three needles and gave it to her. “He is coming; but when you first drop one, there will be a large forest, and so on.” She went and get Sixty-Miles, and she went. Now the Devil came from the wood. He had a rooster. He told his master, “Massa, massa, your pretty girl gone home this morning ’fore day. Massa, massa, your pretty girl gone home this morning ’fore day.” The Devil look about the house for his wife, he didn’t see her. So he went to get Sixty-Miles, and he couldn’t find it. So he get Fifty-Miles. Start after her. He spy her far down the road. He said, “Mary Bell, O Mary Bell! what harm I done you?”

You done me no harm, but you done me good. Bang-a-lang!

Hero, don’t let your foot touch, bang-a-lang!

Hero, don’t let your foot touch!

The Devil catch at her. She drop a needle, and it became a large forest. He said, “Mary Bell, O Mary Bell! how shall I get through?”—“Well,” said she, “go back home, get your axe and cut it out.” And he did. He saw her again, and catch at her. She drop another needle, and a large brick wall stood in the way. He said, “Mary Bell, how shall I get through?”—“Go get your shovel and axe, and dig and pick your way.” He done just the same way. And he get through all right. He spy her again. He said, “Mary Bell, what harm I done you?”

You done me no harm, but you done me good. Bang-a-lang!

Hero, don’t let your foot touch.

He catch at her. She step into her father’s house. The Devil get so mad, he carry half of the man’s house.

I step on a t’in’, the t’in’ bend.

My story is end.