Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who were deeply distraught because they had no children. They were so troubled that words could not express their feelings of sadness. They tried all the healing waters in the world. They took vows and made pilgrimages. They did everything possible, but nothing worked. Then one day the queen discovered that she was pregnant and gave birth to a daughter. At the christening, all the fairies of the realm (seven in all) were asked to serve as godmother with the hope that each would give the child a gift. According to what was known about fairies in those days, they were able to give gifts that would endow the princess with every advantage imaginable.

After the baptism ceremony, the king invited everyone who had taken part to return to the palace, and he had a feast prepared for the fairies. Places were set for each one, with a magnificent plate and a massive gold case containing a spoon, a fork, and a knife embedded with diamonds and made of the finest gold. Just when they were all about to be seated, a fairy who was getting on in her years entered the palace. She had not been invited because she had not left the tower in which she had been living for more than fifty years. Everyone thought that she had either died or fallen under a spell.

The king ordered a place set for her, but he was unable to come up with another massive gold case because they had all been made to order for the seven other fairies. The elderly fairy considered this an insult and muttered some threats under her breath. One of the young fairies who happened to be nearby overheard her words. Worried that the older fairy might be plotting to bring the child bad luck, she hid behind a tapestry as soon as everyone rose from the table. That way she would have the last word and could repair, insofar as possible, any damage the old woman tried to inflict.

Meanwhile, the fairies could be heard presenting their gifts to the princess. The youngest declared, “She will be the most beautiful person in the world.” The next fairy added, “She will have the disposition of an angel.” The third decreed, “Her every movement will be marked by gracefulness.” The fourth, “She will dance beyond compare.” The fifth, “She will sing like a nightingale.” The sixth, “She will play every instrument with consummate skill.”

Finally, it was the turn of the elderly fairy. Her head trembled more with malice than from old age as she decreed, “The princess will die after piercing her finger with a spindle.”

The terrible pronouncement made everyone present quake with fear. No one could hold back their tears. Just then the young fairy stepped out from behind the tapestry and said in a loud voice, “Do not despair, my king and queen, for your daughter will not die. It’s true that I do not have the power to undo what the other fairy has done. The princess will pierce her finger with a spindle, but she will not die. She will fall into a deep sleep that will last a hundred years. When that time is up, a king’s son will appear to wake her up.”

Hoping to avoid the calamity predicted by the elderly fairy, the king issued at once a public edict forbidding his subjects, under pain of death, to use a spindle or to keep any spindles in their homes.

Some fifteen or sixteen years passed. The royal couple traveled with their retinue to one of their country residences, and the princess decided to explore the rooms in it. She walked from one chamber to the next and reached a room at the top of a tower. There she entered a little garret, where an honorable old woman was at work with her distaff and spindle. This good woman had not learned about the king’s prohibition on using spindles for the work of spinning.

“What are you doing there, my good woman?” asked the princess.

“I’m spinning, my lovely child,” replied the old woman, who had no idea who she was.

“Oh, how pretty your work is!” the princess replied. “How do you do what you do? Let me see if I can do it as well as you.”

No sooner had she touched the spindle than she pricked her hand with its point and fainted. After all, she had been reckless and a little thoughtless, but then again it had all been ordained that way. Deeply upset, the good old woman called for help, and it came from all quarters. Some people threw water on the princess’s face. Others unlaced her stays and slapped her hands. Still others rubbed her temples with water from the Queen of Hungary. Nothing could revive her.

The king ran upstairs when he heard the uproar, and he remembered right away what the fairies had predicted. He wisely concluded that everything had proceeded exactly as the fairies had said. He ordered the princess carried up to the finest apartment in the palace and placed on a bed with coverlets embroidered in silver and gold. She was so beautiful that you would have thought her an angel. The swoon had not deprived her of her smooth complexion. Her cheeks were still rosy, and her lips were like coral. Her eyes were shut tight, but you could still hear the gentle sound of her breath and that showed that she was not dead. The king ordered that she be left to sleep in peace until the time came for her to wake up.

The good fairy who had saved the girl’s life by decreeing that she would sleep for one hundred years lived in the Kingdom of Mataquin, twelve thousand leagues away. When the unfortunate events took place in the turret, a dwarf told the good fairy about what had happened. The dwarf owned a pair of seven-league boots—that is, a pair of boots that enabled anyone who put them on to cover seven leagues with a single stride. The fairy set out immediately, and an hour later she was seen arriving in a chariot of fire drawn by dragons. The king advanced and offered his hand to help her out of the chariot. She gave her approval to everything that he had done. But since she was a woman of great foresight, she realized that when the princess finally woke up she would feel somewhat embarrassed about finding herself all alone in that old castle. Here is what she did:

She tapped everyone in the castle with her wand—with the exception of the king and queen. Governesses, maids of honor, ladies-in-waiting, gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, scullions, boys, guards, porters, pages, and footmen—all were touched by her wand. She also waved her wand at all the horses in the stables, their grooms, the great mastiffs in the courtyard, and even little Pouffe, the princess’s tiny dog lying on the bed beside her. As soon as she touched them with her wand, they all fell asleep, and they would not wake up again until the time came for the princess to do so. And in this way they would all be ready to wait on her if she needed them. Even the spits that were turning over the fire, with their partridges and pheasants, were enchanted, and the fire went out as well.

Everything happened almost instantly, for fairies never lose much time when they work. The king and queen kissed their precious daughter without waking her and left the castle. They issued a proclamation declaring that no one could enter the castle. Those orders were unnecessary, for in a matter of moments the park was surrounded by trees, large and small, all covered with thorny brambles. Neither man nor beast could get through. All you could see were the very tops of the castle turrets, and that only from a considerable distance. No one had any doubt that the fairy had had a hand in creating that barrier so that the princess would be spared the curiosity of strangers while she was slumbering.

A hundred years passed by, and the princess’s family had been succeeded by a new family of rulers. One day the son of the king went hunting in the neighborhood and asked about the towers that he could make out above the trees in a large and dense forest. Everyone responded to the prince’s inquiries with the various stories they had been told. Some said that the castle was haunted by ghosts. Others reported that all the witches in that region held their Sabbath there. The most common story told was one about an ogre who lived there and captured as many children as he could, then ate them up at his leisure. No one could follow him, for he alone was able to navigate a path through the woods. While the prince was trying to make up his mind about what to believe, an elderly peasant spoke up and said, “My Prince, it has now been over fifty years since I heard my father say that the most beautiful princess ever seen lies in that castle. He told me that she was supposed to sleep for one hundred years and that she was destined to be awakened by a chosen king’s son.”

The prince heard those words and felt as if he were on fire. There was no doubt in his mind that he was the one destined to undertake this wonderful adventure. Driven by love and glory, he decided instantly to find out what would happen if he set off. As soon as he approached the woods, the trees and brambles began to separate and make a path of their own accord. He was able to pass through unharmed by the thorns. He started walking toward the castle, which was at the end of a long avenue that had opened up before him. To his surprise, the trees grew back in place as soon as he passed through, and none of his attendants could follow him. But he continued to march on, for a young man in love is always courageous.

When he entered a vast courtyard, his blood froze with terror at what he saw. A frightful silence had descended on the place. Death seemed to be everywhere. All you could see were the bodies of humans and animals stretched out on the ground, apparently lifeless. But the prince soon discovered that, judging by the shiny noses and red faces of the porters, everyone was just sleeping. The goblets from which the men had been drinking still contained a few drops of wine and showed that the porters had dozed off while drinking. Passing through a courtyard paved with marble, the prince then went up a staircase. When he entered the guardroom, he saw the guards lined up, their carbines shouldered, and snoring away. He crossed several apartments filled with ladies and gentlemen, every single one asleep, some standing, some seated. Finally he entered a room that was covered entirely with gold leaf and beheld the loveliest sight he had ever looked upon. On a bed with curtains open on each side was a princess who appeared to be about fifteen or sixteen years old. Her radiant charms gave her such a luminous, otherworldly appearance that he approached her trembling, so full of admiration that he knelt down beside her. At that very moment, the spell had come to an end. The princess woke up and bestowed on him a look sweeter than a first glance would ordinarily merit.

“Is it you, my prince?” she asked. “You’ve kept me waiting for such a long time.”

Charmed by these words, and even more by the tone in which they were uttered, the prince hardly knew how to express his joy and gratitude to her. He assured her that he loved her more than he loved himself. His words were not entirely comprehensible, but the princess liked him all the more for that. The less eloquence, the more love, as they say. He was much more flustered than she was, and that makes complete sense, for the princess had had plenty of time to think up what she would say to him. There is reason to believe (though history makes no mention of it) that the good fairy had seen to it that the princess’s dreams were all charming and pleasant during her long sleep. The two talked for many hours without expressing half of what they wanted to tell each other.

In the meantime, everyone at the palace had woken up exactly when the princess did. They all remembered their duties at the court. Since they were not madly in love, they were all famished. The lady-in-waiting, as hungry as everyone else, grew impatient and announced in a loud voice to the princess that dinner was ready. The prince helped the princess get up from the bed. She was fully dressed, and her clothes were magnificent. But the prince was careful to avoid telling her that she was wearing a dress that looked like his grandmother’s, complete with ruffs. Still she looked beautiful in what she was wearing.

The prince and the princess walked into a room with mirrors on all sides, and there the stewards served them supper. The violins and oboes played old-fashioned but lovely pieces of music. And after supper the chaplain lost no time and married them in the royal chapel. The maid of honor discreetly drew the curtains around the bed.

The two did not sleep much. The princess did not need much sleep to begin with, and the prince left at sunrise to return to his city, where his father was anxiously awaiting news of his whereabouts. The prince told his father that he had lost his way in the forest while hunting and that he had spent the night in the hut of a charcoal-burner, who had given him some black bread and cheese for supper.

The prince’s father was a trusting soul and believed his son, but his mother was not fully convinced. She noticed that he went hunting now nearly every day and that he always made up some story as an excuse for staying away for a couple of days. She was sure that he was keeping a mistress. In fact, he had been living with the princess for over two years and had two children with her. The first was a girl name Aurora, and the second a son called Day, because he was even more beautiful than his sister.

The queen began telling her son that he should settle down, and she was hoping she could persuade him to tell her the truth. But the prince did not trust her with his secret. Although he loved her, he was also afraid of her, for she belonged to the race of ogres. The king had married her only for her money. There were rumors that she possessed all the desires of an ogress. Whenever she saw little children, she found it hard to restrain herself from pouncing on them. And for that reason, the prince did not breathe a word about his adventures.

Two years later the king died, and the prince became his heir. He made a public declaration about his marriage and went with pomp and circumstance to fetch his wife. With her two children at her side, the queen made a magnificent entrance.

Not much later, the king went to war with a neighbor named Emperor Cantalabutte. He told his mother the queen to govern in his absence and to take care of his wife and children. Since he was more than likely to be at war for the entire summer, the queen mother sent her daughter-in-law with her children to a country house in the forest. She was hoping to gratify her horrible urges more easily now that he was away. A few days later, she followed them there, and one evening she said to the steward: “I would like to have little Aurora for dinner tomorrow night.”

“Ah, madam!” the steward exclaimed.

“I’m giving you an order,” said the queen, and she spoke those words like an ogre longing to eat fresh meat. “I want her served up with a sauce Robert.”

The poor man saw that there was no use in arguing with an ogress. He pulled out his knife and made his way to little Aurora’s room. She was about four years old at the time. She skipped over to him, threw her arms around him with a giggle, and asked him for some sweets. He burst into tears, and the knife fell from his hands. He decided to go downstairs into the kitchen court, where he slaughtered a lamb and served it up in such a delicious sauce that his mistress assured him that she had never eaten anything like it. In the meantime he carried off little Aurora and gave her to his wife, who hid her in their lodgings at the far end of the kitchen court.

A week later, the wicked queen said to the steward, “Now I would like to have little Day for supper.”

Determined to fool her as he had done before, he did not reply. He went to look for little Day, who was just three years old, and found him with a tiny sword in his hand, fencing with a large monkey. He took the boy over to his wife, who hid him in the same place where his sister was kept. Then he cooked a tender little goat instead of little Day, and the ogress found the meal delicious.

Everything was going well until one evening the wicked queen said to the steward, “Now I would like to have the queen for supper, with the same sauce you used for the children.”

This time the poor steward was in despair and felt sure he would not be able to fool her again. The young queen was now twenty years old, not counting the one hundred years she had slept. Her skin was a little tough, but it was fair and beautiful. Where in the world was he going to find an animal that was as tough as she was?

He decided that the only way to save his own life was to cut the queen’s throat, and he went up to the royal apartment with that plan. He worked up his courage and entered the young queen’s chambers, dagger in hand. But since he did not want to take her by surprise, he decided to tell her that he was carrying out the orders of the queen mother.

“Do what you have to do!” she said, making her neck as long as possible. “Carry out the orders given to you. Then I will finally be reunited with my children, my poor children, that I loved so much.”

The young queen was sure that they had died after being carried away with no explanation.

“No, no, madam!” the poor steward replied, deeply moved. “You shall not die, and you will see your children again. You can find them in my house, where they have been hiding. And I will fool the queen one more time by serving her a young hind in your stead.”

He took her straight to his own quarters, where there was a tearful reunion, and he then cooked up a hind that the queen ate for supper with just as much gusto as if it had been the young queen. Her cruel urges had been appeased, and she planned to tell the king, when he returned, that some ferocious wolves had devoured his wife and two children.

One evening, while she was prowling about as usual around the courtyards and poultry yards of the castle to inhale the scent of fresh meat, she overheard little Day crying because his mother was about to give him a slap for being naughty. She could also hear little Aurora begging forgiveness for her brother. The ogress recognized the voices of the queen and her children and was in a rage about being duped. She gave orders in a way that made everyone tremble with fear. “Bring a large copper vat into the middle of the courtyard early tomorrow morning.”

Once the vat was there the next day, she had it filled up with toads, vipers, adders, and serpents. She was planning to fling the queen, her children, the steward, his wife, and their maidservant into it.

“Bring them to me with their hands tied behind their backs,” she commanded.

As they stood before her, the executioners began preparing to throw them into the copper vat. Just then the king, who had not been expected back until later, rode into the courtyard. He had come posthaste. Greatly astonished, he demanded to know the meaning of the horrible spectacle, but no one dared say a word. The ogress, enraged at the sight of the king, flung herself headfirst into the vat and was devoured by the repulsive reptiles she had ordered put in there. The king could not help but feel sorry for her, because she was his mother, after all. But he soon found consolation with his beautiful wife and their two children.

Moral

Waiting so long,

For a man refined and strong,

Is not at all unusual.

But it is rare to wait a hundred years.

Indeed no woman today

5



Is that patient for a mate.

Our tale was meant to show

That when marriage is deferred,

It is no less happy than the ones you know.

Nothing’s lost after a century or so.

10



And yet, for lovers whose passion

Cannot be controlled and who run off,

Who has the heart to denounce them

Or to teach them a moral lesson?