There was once a woman who had made some bread. She said to her daughter: “Take this loaf of hot bread and this bottle of milk over to granny’s.”

The little girl left. At the crossroads she met a wolf, who asked: “Where are you going?”

“I’m taking a loaf of hot bread and a bottle of milk to granny’s.”

“Which path are you going to take,” asked the wolf, “the path of needles or the path of pins?”1

“The path of needles,” said the little girl.

“Well, then, I’ll take the path of pins.”

The little girl had fun picking up needles. Meanwhile, the wolf arrived at granny’s, killed her, put some of her flesh in the pantry and a bottle of her blood on the shelf. The little girl got there and knocked at the door.

“Push the door,” said the wolf, “it’s latched with a wet straw.”

“Hello, granny. I’m bringing you a loaf of hot bread and a bottle of milk.”

“Put it in the pantry, my child. Take some of the meat in there along with the bottle of wine on the shelf.”2

There was a little cat in the room who watched her eat and said: “Phooey! You’re a slut if you eat the flesh and drink the blood of granny.”

“Take your clothes off, my child,” said the wolf, “and come into bed with me.”

“Where should I put my apron?”

“Throw it into the fire, my child. You won’t be needing it any longer.”

When she asked the wolf where to put all her other things, her bodice, her dress, her skirt, and her stockings, each time he said: “Throw them into the fire, my child. You won’t be needing them any longer.”3

“Oh, granny, how hairy you are!”

“The better to keep me warm, my child!”

“Oh, granny, what long nails you have!”

“The better to scratch myself with, my child!”

“Oh, granny, what big shoulders you have!”

“The better to carry firewood with, my child!”

“Oh, granny, what big ears you have!”

“The better to hear you with, my child!”

“Oh, granny, what big nostrils you have!”

“The better to sniff my tobacco with, my child!”

“Oh, granny, what a big mouth you have!”

“The better to eat you with, my child!”

“Oh, granny, I need to go badly. Let me go outside!”

“Do it in the bed, my child.”

“No, granny, I want to go outside.”

“All right, but don’t stay out long.”

The wolf tied a rope made of wool to her leg and let her go outside.

When the little girl got outside, she attached the end of the rope to a plum tree in the yard. The wolf became impatient and said: “Are you making a load out there? Are you making a load?”

When he realized that there was no answer, he jumped out of bed and discovered that the little girl had escaped. He followed her, but he reached her house only after she had gotten inside.