A gentleman and his wife had a daughter named Rosa. The wife had a ring she always wore, and one day she said to her husband, “Take this ring, for I am dying, and whoever can fit it to her finger is the one you must marry.”

The mother died, and within a few days word went out that the wearer of the dead woman’s ring would have the rich widower for a husband. Eligible ladies from all over came to try on the ring. For some it was too big. For others, too small. And all this took many days.

With one thing and another the ring got lost, and it was missing for oh, about a year. In the meantime the gentleman’s daughter had reached the age of marrying. And one day dear little Rosa was sweeping and found the ring. When she tried it on, it fit her exactly.

Her father, who was just returning from a sea voyage, noticed at once that his daughter was wearing the ring. He was enchanted. “You’ll have to marry me,” he said, “because your mother said so.”

The daughter cried out, “Oh, Papa! How can I marry my own father?”

“Never mind. You’ll do it and that’s that.”

“Very well, father. But before I marry you, you’ll have to bring me a gown the color of all the stars in the sky.”

“Why not!” And off he went to find such a gown.

After two or three days he came home carrying the outfit, and poor Rosa was more upset than ever.

“Very well, Papa, but I must have a gown the color of all the fish in the sea.”

He rushed off at once. Three days later, when she saw him coming back with the gown, she started to cry. “Oh, Papa, I can’t get married with only two gowns. I’d have to have three. Bring me one more, and it had better be the color of all the flowers on earth.”

As she required, so he provided. The very next day, there it was, a gown the color of all the flowers on earth. And without pausing to rest he went into town to make arrangements for the wedding.

The moment he was out of sight she tied her clothes together, along with a magic wand she happened to have, and off she ran with the whole bundle, deep into the forest.

After living in the wild for a few days she came upon a young lioness and managed to kill it. She took its skin and put it on. Mind you, whatever she did she always asked the little wand for assistance.

Nearby in a certain kingdom, there was a prince who had gone into the forest to do some shooting. Spotting a dove, he took a pop at it and it started off. The dove flitted from snag to snag with the prince hurrying behind. He stumbled on. Suddenly he caught sight of a lion cub. He said to himself, “I’ll bring this back as a pet for my mother.” He caught it easily and took it home. “Mama!” he cried. “Look what I’ve brought. A young lioness to keep you company.”

The queen took the little lioness into her arms, then tied it to a leg of the stove. She put down a dish of food for it.

The following Saturday the young prince, Juanito, for that was his name, was hosting a ball, and when the hour arrived he tidied himself up. In no time he was on his way. When he’d gone and it began to get dark, the lioness, who spoke only to the queen, said, “I’d love to go to the ball.”

“You must realize,” said the queen, “that if Juanito found a lion in the ballroom he’d have it shot.”

“Why worry? He wouldn’t dream of shooting me.”

“Then go.”

On the way to the ball she asked the wand to give her a horse saddled in gold. She put on her gown the color of all the stars, mounted the horse, and rode off.

When she arrived at the ball, every guest came to the door to see this princess decked out in silver and gold. Juanito had come with his intended, but in his excitement he completely forgot she was there and began to dance with the princess. He was so infatuated that he made her a promise, which she did not reject, and when dawn came he gave her a gold band inscribed with his name. In exchange she gave him a gold band of her own. Then she jumped on her horse and sped away, slipping into the lion’s skin as soon as she was out of view.

Later that morning Juanito came bursting into the palace, telling his mother all about a certain princess he had seen. He chattered on, with the lioness murmuring,

I might imply,

I might deny,

I might imply

That it was I.



The queen picked up the poker from in front of the stove and gave her a whack to shut her up. Juanito continued, “Mama, I must announce another ball for next Saturday.”

He did just that, planning a ball even grander than the one he had held the week before. When the day came, and he’d sped away, the lioness said to the old mother, “How about it? Untie me!”

“God forbid that you shouldn’t go!”

“I’m on my way.”

As soon as she was out the door she instructed the wand, “As pretty as you made me last Saturday, make me prettier tonight. Make the horse nicer, too.” Then she put on her gown the color of all the fish in the sea and rode off.

When she arrived at the dance, there were cries of excitement. And Juanito? He was enraptured. But at the crack of dawn she told him again, just as she’d told him the week before, “It’s late. I must leave at once.” Quick as a wink he gave her a little gold chain, and she gave him some token or other, mounted her horse, and vanished. They all ran to catch up with her but found no trace of her anywhere. And there was Juanito, panting with lovesickness.

Before she got back to the palace she changed into the lion’s skin. When Juanito arrived, all he could say was, “Oh, Mama, I’m dying. That princess was more beautiful than ever,” while the lioness, from her spot next to the stove, chimed in,

I might imply,

I might deny,

I might imply

That it was I.



The queen gave her a tap with the coal shovel, and Juanito went on, “But don’t worry. There’s going to be another dance next Saturday.”

As delightful as the first two balls had been, the third, he hoped, would surpass them both. And when the day came he refused to eat. He went early to the ballroom to wait for the princess. When he had gone, just at the stroke of six, the little lioness asked her mistress for permission to follow him, and the dotty old queen threw up her hands and said, “Go ahead, get yourself killed!”

Once on the road, she changed into her gown the color of all the flowers on earth. Her horse was bridled in silver and gold, and as radiant as she had seemed the other two times, she was even more radiant now. Juanito rushed toward her and locked his arm in hers. He swept her into the ballroom. They began to dance. Just to be safe, he doubled the guard at the door so she couldn’t escape. But nothing could stand in her way. When he’d given her a jeweled ring, and she’d handed him a gift in exchange, she suddenly disappeared.

The guards ran after her, but already she was far in the distance. Poor Juanito suffered a fainting spell.

Once more she pulled on the snug little lion’s skin. Later, when Juanito returned to the palace, he went straight to bed, so badly smitten that even a swallow of water wouldn’t go down his throat. His mother was beside herself; Juanito was her only child.

And this went on for a week, then another week. At last the little lioness asked her mistress if she thought the prince might like a few tarts. The prince was asked. He said no, he couldn’t eat a thing. But shouldn’t she make them anyway, just on a chance? No, no, said the queen. Goodness! If he knew that a lioness had made them, why would he touch them?

The lioness said, “Why would he know?”

So the little lioness made three tarts. In one she put the gold band, in another the gold chain, and in the third the jeweled ring. If the prince wouldn’t eat them, at least he could cut them open.

The queen brought the tarts to his room, and when he opened the first, there was the gold band. In the second, the gold chain. And in the third, the jeweled ring. The breath of life returned to his body. “Mama, who made these tarts?”

Already the lioness had changed into her gown the color of all the stars in the sky, and when she came into the prince’s room he said to his mama, “This is the princess I told you about.”

He recovered immediately. There were royal feasts and dances. They called in a priest, who performed the wedding. Then Juanito became king. Rosa was queen. And they went right on living with Juanito’s mama.