Someone once told me a story about tigers. The district of She is located in the Wan Mountains, and many tigers live there. One of them was an ancient female tiger who could turn herself into a human whenever she wanted. And when she did, she was out for blood.

In that very region, there lived a peasant with his daughter. One day he sent his daughter out with a basket of jujuba fruit and asked her to take them to his mother-in-law, who lived six miles away. The girl had a little brother, and he came along with her. The boy was about ten years old, and he held her hand all the way. Just as the sun was setting, the girl and her brother realized that they had lost their way. They met an old woman, and she asked them where they were going. “We are going to visit our grandmother.” The woman, who was really a tiger, said, “Why that’s me!”

The two children said, “But our mother told us that her mother has seven moles on her face. You don’t look at all like her, and you have no moles at all.” The woman replied, “That may be true, but this afternoon I was removing the husks from rice, and now my face is all covered with dust. Let me go wash it.” She walked over to a nearby stream and gathered up seven shells. Then she popped them on her face and returned to the child. “Look here,” she said. “Now you can see my moles.” The two children now believed that the woman was their grandmother, and they followed her.

The three traveled through a dark forest until they reached a narrow path. There they found a dwelling that looked just like a cave. The women said, “Uncle Er has just now ordered some workers to find trees to build a separate hall. But for now we will live here in this cave.”

The children followed her into the cave. The old woman was very slow as she moved around, but she was able to fix a complete supper. Once the meal was over, she told the children to go to bed. As they were climbing into bed, she asked, “Which of you is fatter? I need a bolster to prop up my chest.” The brother said, “I am the heavier one.” And so he became the bolster for the woman’s bed. The girl slept at the other end of the bed, at her grandmother’s feet. As soon as the girl stretched out in bed she felt something hairy touching her. She asked what it was. The woman replied, “It’s just a worn-out sheepskin that belongs to Uncle Er. When it gets cold, I put it on to stay warm.”

Around midnight, the girl began to hear the noise of someone eating, and she asked what was going on. The woman replied: “I am eating your dried jujuba fruits. It’s cold out and the night is long. I’m old, and I can’t go hungry.” The girl said, “I’m also hungry.” The woman handed her a berry, but in fact it was a human finger, cold and clammy.

The girl was terrified and leaped to her feet. “I have to go outside and find a place to go to the bathroom.” The woman said, “There are many tigers out there in the forest. You might end up in a tiger’s mouth. Be careful.” The girl replied, “Tie a thick rope around my leg, and pull on it just in case things start to look dangerous.”

The old woman thought that was a good plan. She tied a rope around the girl’s leg and held on to one end of it. The girl took the other end of it and went outdoors. Then in the moonlight she noticed that what she thought was a rope was a long intestine. She quickly removed it from her leg and climbed up into a tree so that no one would find her. The woman waited for a long time. Her calls went unanswered.

She kept on calling, “Listen to me. Don’t stay out there in the cold. Otherwise you will return home sick, and your mother will scold me for failing to take care of you.” The old woman tugged on the cord again, and when she finally succeeded in pulling it back into the house, the girl was not at the end of it. The old woman wept and left the house to search for her. Before long she discovered the girl up in a tree. She called to her to come down but there was no answer. She decided to try to scare the girl by telling her that there were tigers in the trees. The girl answered, “I’m better off in the tree than on that mat. I know that you are really a tiger and that you ate my brother up without a second thought.” The women stomped off in anger.

Before long, the sun began to rise, and a man transporting some goods passed by. The girl called out to him, “Save me from the tigers that are out here.” The fellow put some clothes up in the tree and stole off with her. Later the woman returned with two tigers. She pointed up to the top of the tree and explained that a girl was up there. The tigers looked around in the tree and found the clothes. They were sure that the woman had tricked them and grew angry. Together they devoured the old woman and ran away.