A man had a daughter named Tsélané. One day he set off with his family and his flocks to find fresh pastures. But his daughter refused to go with him. She said to her mother, “I’m not going. Our house is so pretty, with its white and red beads, that I can’t leave.”

Her mother said, “My child, since you are naughty, you will have to stay here all alone. But shut the door tight in case the Marimos1 come and want to eat you.” With that she went away. But in a few days she came back, bringing food for her daughter.

“Tsélané, my child, Tsélané, my child, take this bread, and eat it.”

“I hear my mother, I can hear her. My mother speaks like an ataga bird, like the tsuere coming out of the woods.”

For a long time the mother brought food to Tsélané. One day Tsélané heard a gruff voice saying, “Tsélané, my child, Tsélané, my child, take this bread and eat it.” But she laughed and said, “That gruff voice is not my mother’s voice. Go away, naughty Marimo.” The Marimo went away. He lit a big fire, took an iron hoe, made it red hot, and swallowed it to clear his voice. Then he came back and tried to fool Tsélané again. But he could not, for his voice was still not soft enough. So he heated another hoe, and swallowed it red-hot like the first. Then he came back and said in a still soft voice, “Tsélané, my child, Tsélané, my chee-ild, take this bread and eat it.”

Tsélané thought it was her mother’s voice and opened the door. The Marimo put her in his sack and walked off. Soon he felt thirsty, and, leaving his sack in the care of some little girls, he went to get some spirits in a village. The girls peeped into the sack, saw Tsélané in it, and ran to tell her mother, who happened to be nearby. The mother let her daughter out of the sack, and stuffed it with a dog, scorpions, vipers, bits of broken pots, and stones.

When the Marimo returned home with his sack, he opened it and was planning to cook and eat Tsélané. The dog and the vipers bit him, the scorpions stung him, the pot shards wounded him, and the stones bruised him. He rushed out, threw himself into a mud heap, and was changed into a tree. Bees made honey in its bark, and in the springtime young girls came and gathered the honey for honey-cakes.